Hardware wallets are currently considered the most secure way to manage cryptocurrency keys and sign transactions.
Cryptocurrencies typically organize the ownership of funds using public and private key cryptography. A cryptocurrency wallet software is managing those private keys and submitting signed transactions to the appropriate blockchain. Based on many incidents and the rampant spread of malware and botnets, general-purpose ("personal") computers (PC) and operating systems are increasingly suffering from deprivation of trust. Detachable dedicated hardware tokens promise a hardened single-purpose solution to keep private keys (or seeds thereof) in tamper-resistant storage safe from online or other theft in tamper-resistant storage. While the specialized token still needs the general-purpose PC to post the transaction, the assumption is that a compromised computer can no longer leak private keys nor alter transactions.
However, many current-generation hardware wallets do not operate under a fail-safe, mutually verifying architecture. Instead, researchers suggest that they merely outsourced trust to the external hardware, which effectively only leads to a new single point of failure.
Consequently, they switch the PC-related security risk profile for a hardware token one. Hence, they miss the opportunity to limit risks to an intersection of all involved mutually verifying components (i.e., the computer, the wallet software, and the hardware wallet token).
On an abstract level, a typical blockchain (e.g., Bitcoin or Ethereum) is an account-based system where a transaction can withdraw funds (or post other changes) based on proving the possession of an eligible private key (via a signature). An account (herein used as an analogy to a bank account) consists of a public key (often transformed into a public address, e.g., via hashing) and a private key only known to that pair’s creator. In the most simple form, pairs are generated based on random numbers. There is no explicit act of creating an address. Using an address as an output of a transaction, implicitly creates it (UTXO, Unspent Transaction Output). Opportunistic collision avoidance relies on the vastness of the address space. An address can be single-use (i.e., hold an amount for a certain period and then no more) or have changing amounts associated with it.
In Bitcoin, transactions have multiple inputs and outputs but have to use all funds available at an address. "Change" is given by directing one output to capture the remainder of the transaction and transferring it back to the original address or a new address of the same owner. Bitcoin never saves the actual amount associated with an address on the blockchain but keeps a public ledger of all transactions to recalculate the current amount when needed. This construct prevents many attacks such as double-spending by allowing every node to track all transfers made.
In Bitcoin, a scripting language governs access rights to funds. However, many clients and miners support only a standard set of predefined arrangements. In the most common Pay-to-PubkeyHash (P2PKH) transaction, a transaction draws funds by presenting the public key and a signature of the whole transaction with the private key for each input to unlock it.
In order to simplify address and key management, most wallets are built on the BIP32 [18, 30, 31] hierarchical deterministic (HD) wallet concept using a (nested) child key derivation (CKD) function with a numerical index to create addresses on demand out of one secret master seed 𝑠. Thus, only the master seed 𝑠 or the derived master key pair 𝑚𝑘𝑝 ,𝑚𝑘𝑠 (public key and private/secret key) needs to be stored encrypted (and backed up), simplifying key management. Child keys of child keys lead to a nested tree-like wallet structure where the leaf nodes are Bitcoin addresses (or their key pairs) with unique paths describing each key pair, e.g., mk/0/2 in path-like BIP32 notation is CKD CKD(mk, 0), 2. The public key part of so-called non-hardened keys is verifiable (and producible) if at least one public key from higher tiers within the path is known. In contrast, so-called hardened keys lack that verification, but offer more privacy by not being linkable to any parent keys. In Bitcoin with BIP32, the CKD function is implemented as HMAC-SHA512 and the signature as Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA) respectively. The PubKeyHash is a series of RIPEMD160 and SHA256 hashes. Additionally, a full ASCII-printable Bitcoin address is Base58-encoded, including a network prefix and a checksum. BIP44 [23] extends the HD wallet system to multiple blockchains (e.g., Ethereum).
While a software wallet stores the seed or master key pair encrypted, many users do not trust their Internet-connected general-purpose computer to protect them sufficiently from data theft and malware, including snooped passwords and falsified transactions or data.
 A hardware wallet is typically an external hardware device promising hardened high-security storage of the key material. Since the key material is never meant to leave the device, all cryptographic core functionalities are also moved from the client software to the hardware wallet device, i.e., a part of the wallet client software is outsourced to a dedicated device, but no architectural change is made. For certain operations, hardware wallets may require a passphrase or PIN entered on the PC client or the device itself or a confirmation on the device (e.g., a push button).
In this architecture, initializing and setting up a new bitcoin hardware wallet can happen in two ways: The PC client creates a seed and transfers it to the hardware wallet -or- the hardware wallet creates the random seed, optionally providing a one-time copy for backup purposes.
 Transactions (or necessary data for it) typically have to pass between the hardware wallet and the PC client multiple times. For example, not all public keys might be available to the client software while assembling the transaction. The final two steps are signing the transaction using the private keys of all inputs by the hardware wallet (modulo possible external signatures) and posting the complete transaction by the PC client to the Bitcoin peer-to-peer network. This back-and-forth gives the two partners limited possibilities to verify each other. However, the PC client might not have the opportunity to verify addresses based on hardened keys or where the public key chain is unavailable.
Nowadays with technology, people are changing their ways of doing online transactions; they are seen using Cryptocurrency Wallets. With the prosperity of human economic activities and the development of science and technology, the currency pattern has been constantly changing. Investing Cryptocurrency is like putting money in the bank. After the 1980s, under the support of modern information technology, new currency forms such as electronic money, virtual currency, and digital cryptocurrency emerged one after another. Bitcoin is the most well-known cryptocurrency, and has been in existence since 2009, invented by Satoshi Nakamoto while publishing it in 2008. It has experienced different stages such as physical currency, silver standard, gold standard metal currency and credit currency. 
Cryptocurrency wallet is a software program that stores the public and private keys and interacts with various blockchain to enable users to send and receive digital currency and monitor their balance. The use of Cryptocurrency has been rising in Africa which has been one of the largest economies. According to Statista on “How Common is Crypto” mentioned that Nigeria, one of the African Countries, has been using and owning Cryptocurrency in which they send or receive money all around the world. They have been using Cryptocurrency in their daily lives. There has been a statistical growth since Nigeria began using Cryptocurrency more. There have been higher rates not only in Nigeria but numerous other Countries such as Vietnam, South Africa, Turkey, 8 United States, Peru, Spain, Germany, and Japan (Buchholz, 2020).
The great thing about it is that you can see the records of the transactions, how they increase and how they decrease based on the assets and is stored in one’s digital wallet. It can be stored using a web-based (hot) wallet or large cryptocurrency values are at stake than in a more secure offline (cold) wallet like a USB Drive. 
The private key allows you to have access to your funds through the crypto wallet. it is used to send Bitcoin and must be protected and secured. As for the public key, it is used to receive Bitcoin and can be published anywhere safely. As researchers noticed last decade, centralized exchanges such as MT. Gox and Binance have reported loss from hackers (Young, 2019). There has been an increased number of security breaches that lead to the loss of users’ funds. As a result, investors may become reluctant to rely on centralized exchanges to store funds (Young, 2019). 
Security of cryptocurrency wallets users is a big problem nowadays.
A big challenge in blockchain and cryptocurrency is securing the private key from potential hackers. Nobody can rollback a transaction made with a stolen key once the network confirms it. The technical solution to protect private keys is the cryptocurrency wallet, software, hardware, or a combination to manage the keys.
As blockchain and cryptocurrencies become increasingly popular and practical in various areas from purchasing a coffee to transferring vehicle ownership, they also become more attractive targets for hackers. Every week, we read the news of stealing money from exchanges, servers, and cryptocurrency owners. A big challenge in Bitcoin and almost all blockchains is securing the private keys. Blockchain usually uses elliptic-curve asymmetric cryptography to control the ownership of coins or accounts. For example, a user signs a transaction with her private key to transfer coins to another one, and the blockchain network verifies the signature of the transaction with her public key. After being confirmed by the blockchain network, the transaction, unlike the traditional bank transfer, cannot be rolled back by anyone.
Consequently, the private key has full control of the crypto funds, and the most crucial task of the user is keeping her private keys safe. It is one of the essential challenges in cryptocurrencies. Existing systems require a particular software or hardware called crypto wallet to store the private keys and sign the transactions. Crypto wallets have a spectrum from online wallet to cold wallet while many experts believe the most secure one is the hardware wallet. It usually is a dedicated cryptographic device in the form of a USB stick, Bluetooth device, or smart card. Even though the hardware wallet is secure in many aspects, some essential issues should be addressed.
A hardware wallet must have a Secure Element to store secrets and keys and perform cryptographic operations.
The first significant problem in current hardware wallets is the backup and recovery process. Almost all of them use a word list (mnemonics) to back up private keys and restore them when needed. The user must write these words on a piece of paper and keep it safe. This method converts the seed of private keys from digital form to physical form and moves the problem to the outside of the wallet.
In the classic model, every time a user wants to refill her sub-wallet, she sends the fund from the super-wallet address to the sub-wallet address. This process is straightforward but has significant drawbacks. First, each time the user refills the sub-wallet, the super-wallet creates a transaction and publishes that to the blockchain network. Thus, she pays a miner fee for each such transaction. Also, she should wait for confirmation, so refilling the sub-wallet takes time. Also, refilling the sub-wallet is risky because a hacker could perform Man-In-The-Middle (MITM) attack to replace the original sub-wallet address by his address to receive funds from the super-wallet. Furthermore, the user must maintain the backup of both the super-wallet and subwallet. 
Crypto wallets are an important component of the cryptocurrency world. It allows investors to send and receive cryptocurrency in addition to storing their cryptocurrency like Bitcoin and Ether in a secured and private manner. Crypto wallets are generally independent of the crypto market where cryptocurrency transactions occur. 
Unlike the popular conception, crypto wallets do not store your cryptocurrency in the wallet. Cryptocurrencies reside in the Blockchain and can only be accessed through your crypto wallet, which has your private key. This key is critical for proving the ownership of the cryptocurrency and thereby allows owners to make send and receive transactions.
A crypto wallet is designed to make it possible for owners of the wallets to interact with the Blockchain where their cryptocurrency resides. This could be done through digital or hardware wallets. However, the name does not indicate its true functionality since they do not keep the cryptocurrency.
The wallet allows users to access and manage their cryptocurrency and make any type of transactions. 
Although crypt wallets are offered in several types and forms, some are provided through crypto exchanges, others are used as downloaded software to a user‟s machine as a digital or hard wallet]. They all had public and private keys. These keys are used to access the crypt currencies available on the Blockchain.
Crypto wallets act as a shield for people dealing with cryptocurrency since they store their information locally instead of holding them in a cryptocurrency exchange. Hacking and other cyber threats make holding your assets at an exchange perilous. 
Crypto wallets come in different types and names with several advantages and disadvantages, however the two main types are Digital and Hardware wallets. But what is the best option to choose when you start your crypto journey, digital or hardware wallets.
Cold and hot wallets are the two major types of cryptocurrency wallets. The major difference between the two is that an internet connection is required for hot wallets but not for cold wallets. Hot wallet users typically use them to buy something on the internet and hold a small amount of money for that purpose, whereas cold wallets function like a vault in a bank to store various types of digital values. It is best to have both wallets, primarily for security reasons.
There are several types of hot and cold wallets used by cryptocurrency investors, including online wallets, hardware wallets, mobile wallets, paper wallets, and desktop wallets. Hot wallets include online, mobile, and desktop wallets.
Digital wallets are available online, and anyone can open up a digital wallet account simply by downloading the wallet app or software to a mobile or computer. This type of wallet allows you to keep your private keys on your devices instead of keeping this crucial data at an online market or third-party provider. Digital wallets allow the owner to store, send, and receive his cryptocurrency. It is the responsibility of the owner to safeguard his information on his computer or his cell phone.
Digital wallet software is stored on the computer‟s hard disk therefore it is stored locally within the owner‟s computer. Digital wallets are connected online to the crypto markets, and since they are connected to the Internet all the time, they are susceptible to online hackers.