A merkle tree is a binary tree with hash pointers.


The output refers to the destination address used in the bitcoin transaction.


Confidentiality means that the transmitted message is only received by an authorized party.


Authentication is the verification of the identity of the sender at the receiver end.


Genesis Block is the very first block in the block chain of any digital currency.


Block Reward refers to the “reward” that the Miner receives for successfully hashing a transaction block.


Each block in the blockchain contains a cryptographic hash of the data of the previous block.


Bitcoin Whitepaper was written by Satoshi Nakamoto in 2008, it describes the original plan and protocol for Bitcoin.


Satoshi is a Bitcoin “cent”, the smallest form of Bitcoins. One Bitcoin is equal to 1 million Satoshis.


A ledger is a file which keeps the record of all the transactions taking place between the two parties on the blockchain network.


Cold Storage is a security measure for Bitcoin that is disconnected from the internet. Could be a paper wallet, USB stick or hardware wallet.


Why Are Smart Contracts Superior to Traditional Contracts?: Smart contracts provide a blockchain-based alternative to traditional agreements, addressing inefficiencies, high costs, and geographic limitations.


Satoshi Nakamoto is the creator of Bitcoin and the author of the original Bitcoin whitepaper and code. His real identity is unknown to the world.


What Are Some Use Cases for Smart Contracts?: Smart contracts are transforming industries since they use blockchain technology to automate, increase transparency, and save money.


An exchange is exactly how it sounds, somewhere where account holders can exchange one digital currency for another or a Fiat currency for a digital currency.


Non Repudiation is a method of guaranteeing message transmission between parties via digital signature or encryption. It helps to protect against the denial of authentication attempts.


Some transactions that occur in the bitcoin block chain contain transaction fees. These transaction fees are paid to the miner that hashes the block in question.


A faucet is when an individual or team of individuals develop a digital currency and pre-mined a certain amount before release and gave these pre-mined coins away.


The nonce is selected by the miners to solve a cryptographic puzzle for generating the next block in the chain. It is known as proof of work.


A Peer-to-Peer (P2P) payment system, seamlessly integrated with blockchain technology, a decentralized application (DApp), and MetaMask wallet, orchestrates a streamlined and secure process for transparent transactions among users.


A Fiat currency is a traditional paperback currency that is regulated by an organization such as the central bank. Examples include the Euro, the US dollar and the Australian dollar.


Cryptography is a method of developing techniques and protocols to prevent a third party from accessing and gaining knowledge of the data from the private messages during a communication process.


The public key is a string of digits and letters (your bitcoin address). When hashed with a corresponding string known as a private key it digitally signs and online communication.


Bit Pay is a payment processing company and software that allows merchants such as eBay, Amazon and other online shopping channels to accept bitcoin as payment for its goods and services.


An ASIC Miner is the hardware that houses the chip of the same name. You put them into your Internet connection via a modem or wireless mode. Bitcoin is independent of your desktop computer.


Bit is a common unit used to designate a sub-unit of a bitcoin - 1,000,000 bits is equal to 1 bitcoin (BTC). This unit is usually more convenient for pricing, tips, goods and services.


A block is a record in the block chain that contains and confirms many waiting transactions. Roughly every 10 minutes, on average, a new block including transactions is appended to the block chain through mining.


ASIC stands for application specific integrated circuit, which is a specialized silicon chip that performs just one task. In the digital currency space, these chips process SHA-256 in order to mine bitcoin and validate transactions.


Mt. Gox is one of the first Bitcoin exchanges that began liquidating after more than 850,000 of its users’ Bitcoins were lost or stolen – an amount equal to more than $450,000,000 at the time.


Smart contracts, self-executing codes embedded within the blockchain, govern the parameters of transactions. These contracts autonomously execute payment instructions when predetermined conditions are met, obviating the necessity for intermediaries and enhancing the efficiency of the system.


Dogecoin is an altcoin first started as a joke in late 2013. Dogecoin, which features a Japanese fighting dog as its mascot, gained a broad international following and quickly grew to have a multi-million dollar market capitalization.


How Do Smart Contracts Work?: Smart contracts operate on blockchain technology and are self-executing programs running on a blockchain network. They follow a simple if/then logic: when specific conditions are completed, the contract executes predefined actions automatically.


SHA-256 is the cryptographic function that dictates how the hash is constructed for the digital currency of Bitcoin. In bitcoin, SHA-256 is this function, and is used as the basis for hash creation (i.e. bitcoin’s proof of work).


Proof of work (PoW) simply refers to the output of any efforts to mine bitcoin. In the bitcoin block chain, the hashing of a block takes time and effort, meaning the hash block can be considered proof of work.


Bitcoin index is the live bitcoin news, a weighted average index that shows the value of one bitcoin versus one single unit of currency of each of the majors in the Forex space – EUR, USD, JPY, GBP and AUD.


Paper Wallet simply refers to a printed sheet of paper that holds a number of public bitcoin addresses and corresponding private keys. Some people prefer to store their bitcoin in this form of cold storage in order to improve security.


When Are Smart Legal Contracts Used?: Smart legal contracts combine the efficiency of blockchain-based smart contracts with the enforceability of traditional agreements. This fusion bridges the gap between emerging crypto solutions and established legal frameworks, making blockchain technology relevant in regulated industries.


Microtransaction is the ability to pay for things in very small sums thanks to the fact that Bitcoin may be extended to 8 decimal places. Microtransactions are especially important to Bitcoin casinos by providing players the ability to deposit and gamble fractions of Bitcoins.


BTC is the shorthand of Bitcoin. Bitcoin is a form of digital currency created in 2009, that is created and distributed on a peer-to-peer basis. It has no central bank - transactions are conducted directly between individuals. Bitcoin is the most popular kind of cryptocurrency.


Silk Road is an underground website, as part of the “dark web”, that was essentially a black market online. One could purchase illegal drugs, organs or hire assassins online. The site used cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin and was shut down in 2013 by the FBI.


The hash rate is the measuring unit of the processing power of the Bitcoin network. The Bitcoin network must make intensive mathematical operations for security purposes. When the network reached a hash rate of 10 Th/s, it meant it could make 10 trillion calculations per second.


Double spending is when a malicious user tries to spend their bitcoins with two different recipients at the same time. Bitcoin mining and the block chain are there to create a consensus on the network about which of the two transactions will confirm and be considered valid.


In conclusion, there are myriads of different types of cryptocurrency wallets; these elements will be used to evaluate Web based Wallet, App based Wallet, hardware wallet and Paper Wallet. As mentioned earlier, OWASP for IoT guidelines are industry 32 standard tests which will help evaluate the IoT security.


Paper wallet is a way of storing cryptocurrency which creates an image that contains the private and public keys to a new wallet address along with QR codes. This is depicted in Figure 3 above, which you can see printed, sealed, and stored securely in a safe or another secure place.


A Bitcoin address is similar to a physical address or an email. It is the only information you need to provide for someone to pay you with Bitcoin. An important difference, however, is that each address should only be used for a single transaction. Typically consists of between 26 and 35 alphanumeric characters.


Peer-to-peer (P2P) refers to systems that work like an organized collective by allowing each individual to interact directly with the others. In the case of Bitcoin, the network is built in such a way that each user is broadcasting the transactions of other users. And, crucially, no bank is required as a third party.


Companies from different Countries have supplied hardware wallets, explaining the aims and objectives of these wallets. There are some reasons why users or investors are recommended to use these types of hardware wallets because of the degrees of security and privacy. The purpose of these Hardware Wallets is to promote a safe way of storing and sending bitcoin.


Proof of Work is the original consensus algorithm used in blockchain networks like Bitcoin and Ethereum. In PoW, participants, known as miners, compete to solve complex mathematical problems. The first one to solve the problem gets the right to add a new block to the blockchain and is rewarded with newly created cryptocurrency (mining reward) and transaction fees.


Blockchain is a digital file distributed to everyone participating in a cryptocurrency network. The blockchain acts as a kind of general ledger, keeping track of all the transactions that happen in the network. Everyone can look at the blockchain to see what transactions have happened on the network, and the blockchain is sealed using cryptography so that no one can tamper with it.


What is a Bitcoin Mining Rig?: Bitcoin mining underpins the security of the Bitcoin network. Whether you're curious about how it works or considering mining yourself, understanding the tech behind it is the first step.
Mining rigs come in many forms — from custom-built towers using off-the-shelf parts to high-powered machines engineered for speed and energy efficiency, measured in joules per terahash (J/TH).


Altcoin is a form of cryptocurrency that has the same decentralized, peer-to-peer principles as bitcoin, but which uses its own blockchain and has its own rules of operation. Altcoin is the term used to describe those digital currencies that do not have as big a market capitalization or do not have the recognition of the current incumbent cryptocurrencies such as bitcoin, litecoin and dogecoin.


A Hash tree or Merkle tree is a tree in which every leaf node is labelled with the cryptographic hash of a data block, and every non-leaf node is labelled with the cryptographic hash of the labels of its child nodes. Hash trees allow efficient and secure verification of the contents of large data structures. Hash trees are a generalization of hash lists and hash chains.


What’s the difference between a cold wallet and a hot wallet?: A hot wallet is connected to the internet and could be vulnerable to online attacks — which could lead to stolen funds — but it’s faster and makes it easier to trade or spend crypto. A cold wallet is typically not connected to the internet, so while it may be more secure, it’s less convenient.


A private key is a secret piece of data that proves your right to spend bitcoins from a specific wallet through a cryptographic signature. Your private key(s) are stored in your computer if you use a software wallet; they are stored on some remote servers if you use a web wallet. Private keys must never be revealed as they allow you to spend bitcoins for their respective Bitcoin wallet.


Cryptocurrency is the broad name for digital currencies that use blockchain technology to work on a peer-to-peer basis. Cryptocurrencies don't need a bank to carry out transactions between individuals. The nature of the blockchain means that individuals can transact between each other, even if they don't trust each other. The cryptocurrency network keeps track of all the transactions and ensures that no one tries to renege on a transaction.


Cryptography is the branch of mathematics that lets us create mathematical proofs that provide high levels of security. Online commerce and banking already uses cryptography. In the case of Bitcoin, cryptography is used to make it impossible for anybody to spend funds from another user's wallet or to corrupt the block chain. It can also be used to encrypt a wallet, so that it cannot be used without a password.


What’s the difference between a hardware wallet and a soft wallet?
A software wallet, or “soft wallet,” is an app on your computer or phone that manages your crypto keys online. It’s more convenient for everyday use, like shopping or trading, since it’s easy to access, but it’s more exposed to online risks. So, hardware wallets are best for long-term storage, and software wallets are good for daily spending and trading.


Confirmation means that a transaction has been processed by the network and is highly unlikely to be reversed. Transactions receive a confirmation when they are included in a block and for each subsequent block. Even a single confirmation can be considered secure for low value transactions, although for larger amounts like $1,000 US, it makes sense to wait for 6 confirmations or more. Each confirmation exponentially decreases the risk of a reversed transaction.


A cryptographic signature is a mathematical mechanism that allows someone to prove ownership. In the case of Bitcoin, a Bitcoin wallet and its private key(s) are linked by some mathematical magic. When your Bitcoin software signs a transaction with the appropriate private key, the whole network can see that the signature matches the bitcoins being spent. However, there is no way for the world to guess your private key to steal your hard-earned bitcoins.


How Can You Avoid Dusting Attacks?: Using a hierarchical-deterministic (HD) wallet, which creates new addresses each time you transact, makes it harder to trace you. Some wallets also show dust UTXOs (unspent transaction outputs), which you can mark “do not spend.” These small amounts are then left in your wallet, and if you never use them, no one can track where they go. Others wallets only go online using the Tor Network or a VPN.


What Will Happen When the Last Bitcoin Is Mined?: The last Bitcoin is expected to be mined by the year 2140. After mining has been completed, no new bitcoins will be issued into the market. The miners will then rely on transaction fees to validate transactions and maintain the blockchain.
When block rewards disappear, miners can cover the expenses through higher transaction fees. The system will remain secure, and miners will continue to help approve transactions.


What Is a Smart Contract?: A smart contract is a digital agreement stored and executed on a blockchain network. These contracts are programmed to perform specific actions once predefined conditions trigger them, ensuring reliability and efficiency. 
Smart contracts utilize blockchain technology, which are designed to enhance immutability and authentication. Once created, the contract is tamper-proof, offering unparalleled security. Whether for managing digital assets, automating payments, or powering decentralized applications (DApps), smart contracts are reshaping how agreements are made.


A Bitcoin wallet is loosely the equivalent of a physical wallet on the Bitcoin network. The wallet actually contains your private key(s) which allow you to spend the bitcoins allocated to it in the block chain. Each Bitcoin wallet can show you the total balance of all bitcoins it controls and lets you pay a specific amount to a specific person, just like a real wallet. This is different from credit cards where you are charged by the merchant.


Proof of Stake is a consensus algorithm where validators, also known as "stalkers," are chosen to create a new block based on the amount of cryptocurrency they hold and are willing to "stake" as collateral. In a PoS system, validators are selected to create blocks and validate transactions based on factors such as the number of coins they own and are willing to lock up. Ethereum is transitioning from Proof of Work to Proof of Stake with Ethereum 2.0.


Blocks can be recognized by their block height(Block No.) and block header hash. The data in the block is detected through a computerized algorithm known as a Hash function. It not only locks the data to be seen by the participants in the Blockchain but also makes the data immutable. Every block has its hash function. In Blockchain, once the data has been recorded, it will not be changed. Blockchain works like a digital notary with timestamps to avoid tampering with information.


Can I Own Crypto and Not Hold My Keys?: Yes, and millions of cryptocurrency investors do. If you keep your cryptocurrency on an exchange, you are trusting that exchange to keep your private keys — and by extension your cryptocurrency — secure on your behalf. They are “holding” or keeping custody of the public and private keys for you, either in a hot wallet with intermingled funds from all their customers, or in cold storage, where your crypto and keys are distinctly separated and segregated.


A user's private key has full control of the user's fund, and she should stand on her own feet and keep her private keys safe by herself, which is one of the most critical challenges in cryptocurrencies. Users usually employ crypto wallets to generate and store their private keys and sign transactions. Crypto wallets have many forms from online wallets to mobile and cold wallets, and the most secure one is hardware wallet which usually is in the form of a USB stick, Bluetooth device or smartcard.


Should You Be Worried About Getting Dusted?: Unless you’re a whale (a person with large holdings) or live in an area where personal safety, security or political instability is a common problem, dust attacks are more of an annoyance than a real concern. Crypto dust in your wallet doesn’t give anyone control of your funds. The privacy measures new wallets and exchanges have implemented have greatly reduced common concerns around dusting. If you see tiny random transactions in your wallet, you’re not imagining things — it’s just a little “dust.”


Should You Use a Paper Wallet?: Initially, paper wallets were recommended. They started to become popular in late 2010 and began to wane in popularity around 2016. As long as it’s created properly, a paper wallet is immune to online attacks — you can’t hack a piece of paper. Major exchanges used to give customers the ability to create and print paper wallets right from their accounts. But, most experts no longer recommend storing large amounts of crypto this way because of the emergence of more secure options like hardware wallets.


A cryptographic hash is a mathematical function that takes a file and produces a relatively short code that can be used to identify that file. A hash has a couple of key properties: It is unique. Only a particular file can produce a particular hash, and two different files will never produce the same hash. It cannot be reversed. You can't work out what a file was by looking at its hash. Hashing is used to prove that a set of data has not been tampered with. It is what makes bitcoin mining possible.


The private key allows you to have access to your funds through the crypto wallet. it is used to send Bitcoin and must be protected and secured. As for the public key, it is used to receive Bitcoin and can be published anywhere safely. As we noticed last decade, centralized exchanges such as MT. Gox and Binance have reported losses from hackers. There has been an increased number of security breaches that lead to the loss of users’ funds. As a result, investors may become reluctant to rely on centralized exchanges to store funds.


What Does Anonymous Mean in Crypto?:
Although transactions with many cryptocurrencies, like bitcoin (BTC), are more traceable than cash transactions, some cryptocurrencies were designed with anonymity and privacy in mind, including Zcash (ZEC), Monero (XMR), and Grin (GRIN) and Beam (BEAM).
Although some transactions are anonymous to further criminal behavior, privacy is a basic human right, afforded to citizens by governments, and is an essential component of greater freedom. For example, anonymous transactions would allow a person in a non-LGBTQ+-friendly country to donate to an LGBTQ+ rights organization without revealing their real-world identity and risk facing persecution.


What is Cryptojacking?: File-based cryptojacking is a form of cryptojacking where malware is downloaded on-device, there is also browser-based cryptojacking, which uses your web browser to mine cryptocurrency while you’re using it. Servers can also be cryptojacked, which may be problematic for organizations that run their own compute resources either on premise or in the cloud.
Cryptojacking can also be performed locally. For example, a rogue employee can install miners at their workplace and mine for cryptocurrency using company computers. Alternatively, they can cryptojack from their workplace by stealing electricity and using it on their own concealed equipment.


What Does It Mean to Hold Your Private Keys?: Holding your private keys means that you are in control of your keys. Not only do you control your cryptocurrency, you’re also responsible for its security. “Not your keys, not your coins” is a common phrase you might have heard from proponents of this solution, meaning that if you don’t personally hold your own private keys, you can’t truly be sure that you own and control your cryptocurrency assets. Most cryptocurrency wallets now give you control of your private keys through a seed phrase that must also be kept secret.


What is the difference between a hardware wallet and a hot wallet?
A hardware wallet is a physical device that stores your crypto keys securely offline, away from the internet. It’s like a safe for your digital money, keeping it protected from online hacks and threats. On the other hand, a hot wallet is a type of software wallet that’s always connected to the internet, making it easy to access and use for daily transactions. While hot wallets are convenient for quick access and trading, they are more vulnerable to online attacks compared to the secure, offline environment of hardware wallets.


How Does Bitcoin Work?: Bitcoin operates on a distributed network, which allows users to use the network without needing intermediary institutions such as central banks for payments. Miners validate the transactions by solving various puzzles to provide security and legitimacy. Bitcoin is a distributed ledger in which all transactions are recorded in a “block,” making them immutable. This transparency is a key to Bitcoin’s security and trustworthiness. Also, Bitcoin’s ownership is encrypted through cryptography, protecting the users’ private keys to facilitate the authorization of various transactions. Although Bitcoin’s proof-of-work consensus is highly energy-demanding, specific measures are being taken to increase green mining.


Cryptocurrencies usually use elliptic-curve asymmetric cryptography to control the ownership of coins or accounts . In other words, to transfer funds from a user to another, the sender signs a transaction with her private key, and the blockchain verifies the signature of the transaction with the sender 's public key. If the blockchain network accepts and confirms this transaction, nobody can roll it back, unlike the traditional bank transfer. Thus, if a hacker empties the user account and transfers all her money to his account, she has no way to reverse the transaction and recover her loss. Unfortunately, many people have experienced this disaster.


However, Mt. Gox's rapid rise was overshadowed by significant security issues. In June 2011, the platform suffered a major breach where a huge quantity of bitcoin was stolen, highlighting the vulnerabilities in the exchange's security infrastructure. These issues culminated in February 2014, when Mt. Gox abruptly halted all trading, closed its website, and filed for bankruptcy protection. It was revealed that approximately 850,000 BTC, valued at about $450 million at the time, were missing and presumed stolen due to a hack that had gone undetected for years. This was a huge blow to the cryptocurrency community and highlighted the necessity for more regulatory clarity for the industry.


Online or Web-Based Wallets are a type of electronic card which is used for transactions made online; Its utility is the same as a credit or debit card, it primarily has two components, the first is software, and the second is information. The software component stores personal information and provides security and encryption of the data, whereas the information component is a database of details provided by the user which includes their name, home address, payment method, amount to be paid, credit or debit card details, etc. These wallets are vulnerable, and it is recommended not to leave a large amount of crypto tokens in this wallet.


What Is Mt. Gox?: Mt. Gox was a cryptocurrency exchange based in Tokyo, Japan, and was once the largest platform for trading Bitcoin. Initially founded in 2010 by Jed McCaleb as a platform for trading cards from the game Magic: The Gathering (the name Mt. Gox is short for "Magic: The Gathering Online Exchange"), the site quickly pivoted to become one of the first major exchanges for Bitcoin. In 2011, McCaleb sold the platform to Mark Karpelès, a French developer living in Japan. After that point, the platform experienced rapid growth and soon became the dominant Bitcoin exchange globally, handling about 70% of Bitcoin transactions by 2013.


What is the best type of crypto wallet?
The best type of crypto wallet depends on your needs. If security is your top priority and you’re holding crypto as a long-term investment, a hardware wallet (or another form of cold wallet) is ideal because it keeps your keys offline and safe from online hacks. But, if you need quick access to your crypto for trading or everyday use, a software wallet (also known as a hot wallet) might be better because it’s easy to use and accessible from your computer or smartphone. Many people use both types: a hardware wallet for savings and a software wallet for daily spending.


What is the difference between a hardware wallet and a cold wallet?
A hardware wallet is a type of cold wallet, but not all cold wallets are hardware wallets. Both types store your crypto keys offline, which keeps them safe from online threats. The main difference is that a hardware wallet is a physical device designed specifically for securely managing and storing your crypto keys. Other cold wallets might include paper wallets or even a computer that never connects to the internet. So, while all hardware wallets are considered cold wallets because they’re offline, cold wallets can also include other methods of storing your crypto securely without the internet.


Why Public and Private Keys are Essential for Crypto Security?: At its heart, cryptocurrency is about self-custody—the ability to own and control your funds without relying on a third party. This is made possible through public and private keys, with the private key granting exclusive control over your funds. Unless your private key is physically taken, no one else can access your assets.
By keeping your private key offline and never entering it into an internet-connected device, you safeguard your funds against hacking. This is a massive benefit when compared to storing funds on an exchange, where a stolen password can result in unauthorized access and loss of funds.


What if I Lose My Private Keys?: If you lose your private keys, you could lose access to your funds. However, losing your cryptocurrency wallet or private keys doesn’t necessarily mean you’ve lost the funds. The funds were never “in” the wallet or private keys to begin with; they’re still recorded on the blockchain. These keys just prove that you are the owner of the funds. If they’re lost, that seed phrase you’ve safely stowed away is the only way to recover your private keys; with it, you can regenerate the private keys in a new wallet. After you recover your keys, you can continue to buy and sell cryptocurrency.


What’s the Difference Between Proof of Stake and Proof of Work? Compare and Contrast PoS and PoW. PoS VS PoW: Proof-of-Work, used in networks like Bitcoin (BTC), was the first consensus mechanism developed for blockchain and has played a foundational role in cryptocurrency. However, the crypto mining involved expends significant computational power, consuming vast amounts of energy and contributing to an environmental impact. 
PoS, by contrast, offers a more sustainable solution by enabling validators to participate without heavy computational needs.
In PoS, validators are selected based on the number of tokens they hold and are willing to lock up as collateral. This method preserves network security and reduces energy consumption, making PoS a greener alternative to PoW.


What is Decentralization?: Decentralization is the central ethos of blockchain technology and drives projects across the ecosystem. Applying decentralized processes and tech eliminates the role of intermediaries across industries and manifests in many different ways. For example: by removing banking institutions from financial instruments, decentralized finance (DeFi) platforms, rather than intermediaries, are able to distribute profits and governance to users and the wider community. On an even more foundational level, decentralized networks crowdsource consensus, meaning that no one entity can control or censor the data that transacts through it. However, achieving optimal decentralization tends to decrease network throughput. As more miners secure a Proof-of-Work (PoW) network through consensus, transaction speeds may drop — which is considered a hurdle to widespread adoption.


How Much Bitcoin (BTC) Is Left To Mine?: Of the  21 million total bitcoins, about 19 million have already been mined, leaving approximately 2 million remaining. As the remaining supply decreases, mining rewards diminish through the periodic halving events. bitcoins are likely to be produced before reaching the limit. 
Because of Bitcoin’s halving event, it will likely take years to mine the remaining 2 million bitcoins. With every halving event, the rewards are reduced, and the process becomes even slower and tends to consume more resources. The last bitcoin that will be produced and launched into circulation is expected to be produced by the end of the year 2140, ensuring the Bitcoin mining process will slow down in the market over time.


Why Does Bitcoin Need Mining Rigs?: Bitcoin uses a system called Proof of Work (PoW). Mining rigs compete to solve cryptographic puzzles — and when one wins, it confirms a new block of transactions. This process secures the network without needing any central authority. Every 10 minutes or so, a new block of transactions is added to the chain, but that only happens when a mining rig successfully solves the block’s cryptographic puzzle. This process is what keeps the network decentralized and secure — and it’s why miners are rewarded with newly minted BTC. This regular, predictable block production is what allows Bitcoin to function without a central authority. It’s how value is transferred, verified, and stored — all through decentralized consensus.


What Are Privacy Tokens?: Privacy tokens, or privacy coins, are designed to preserve user anonymity. These tokens offer features such as hiding the origin or destination of a transaction, the balance of a user’s wallet, and other methods of preventing a transaction or user’s identity from being tracked. Tokens of this kind use a variety of different methods such as advanced cryptography, zero-knowledge proofs, and zk-SNARKs, to provide a high degree of privacy.
Instead of standard verification techniques, they employ techniques such as 'CoinJoin', which merges multiple transactions into one before distributing funds to individual wallets, making transaction histories virtually untraceable. Additionally, privacy-focused blockchains often generate new addresses for each transaction—known as stealth addresses—to ensure that the source of funds remains unverifiable in theory.


Satoshi Nakamoto is the creator of Bitcoin. While the true identity of Satoshi Nakamoto may never be known for certain— despite those like Dorian Nakamoto, whom the mainstream media say is Satoshi—what we do know, in very prolific and historical detail, are the underpinnings and design of Bitcoin from its earliest days. The first words posted by Satoshi Nakamoto were eloquent in their simplicity as he announced his creation, which would go on to change the world, “I’ve been working on a new electronic cash system that’s fully peer-to-peer, with no trusted third party.” He then put a link to a white paper he had written on the subject. These discussions, taking place publicly on the bitcointalk.org forum, went on until December 12th, 2010.  After that, Satoshi went dark.


Why Create a Second Bitcoin?: Transaction speed is crucial to the scalability, functionality, widespread adoption, and ultimate success of a cryptocurrency. The original Bitcoin can process seven transactions per second, whereas Bitcoin Cash is able to process 116 transactions per second on average. And for context, Visa processes 24,000 transactions per second. In the eyes of BCH supporters, a speed of seven transactions per second wasn’t going to cut it in the long run.
The primary reason for the Bitcoin Cash fork was to increase the number of transactions that could take place each second, which is reflected in BCH’s increased block size. In addition, developers took measures to reduce the total amount of data that needed to be verified in each transaction, which further sped up the process.


Centralized vs. Decentralized Crypto Lending: Although some may naturally associate the use of cryptocurrency with the idea of decentralization, this isn’t always the case. You may think of centralized P2P lending platforms as FinTech companies that utilize cryptocurrency. These companies — like SALT, Celsius, and BlockFi, for example — operate similarly to conventional banks and financial services companies and have minimal P2P elements, if any.
Lending platforms follow Know You Customer (KYC) protocols, assume custody of users’ cryptocurrency, and act as intermediaries between the fiat and crypto ecosystems. Often, the platform is the lender itself. Furthermore, lender interest rates are often set by the company, not by the smart contracts that govern decentralized platforms. Centralized crypto loan platforms take a tried-and-true approach to loans, but do so with digital assets.


What Does a Pseudonym Mean in Crypto?: Many in the crypto community use pseudonyms for privacy, either to shield their identity as part of a move toward self-sovereignty, or because of concerns about their personal privacy or security. Many find Bitcoin appealing because pseudonymity is built into the protocol.
When you open a bank account, you are required to show identification that links your financial transactions to your identity, which is neither anonymous data nor pseudonymous data. When you create a Bitcoin wallet, you generate an alphanumeric address that allows you to send or receive bitcoin and is visible to the whole world on the blockchain. However, this address provides you with pseudonymity, rather than anonymity, because financial forensics on your public address can be traced back to your real-world identity.


When Did Cryptojacking Begin?: Though cryptojacking didn’t start in 2017, it certainly came to prominence at this time. A company called Coinhive developed a mining tool for website owners to mine cryptocurrency as an alternative to displaying ads. The viewers of the website got ad-free access while the website owners earned passive crypto-mining income.
Initially, this arrangement was open, transparent, and consensual between website visitors and owners. However, cybercriminals soon saw the profit-making potential and started secretly putting malicious informatic code on thousands of websites, often without the knowledge of website owners or viewers. For example, one cryptojacking botnet, a network of computers infected with malware working in coordination, called Smominru, was discovered in over half a million infected devices in 2017 (although it may have been in operation since 2012).


Bitcoin was created by an anonymous person (or group of persons) known as Satoshi Nakamoto. At the time Nakamoto made his first public post announcing his paper on Bitcoin, he was just another anonymous user like millions of others posting on Internet forums. His new software was then still in the early phase of development, and Bitcoin was only an experiment in its early stages. Satoshi’s interaction was limited to email exchanges only and for a brief duration of a little over 2 years. Since then, we haven’t heard from him. Around the time of his last post, Bitcoin’s value was soaring, and the media were starting to take notice. Just when Bitcoin appeared poised to take off and was beginning to attract serious interest, Satoshi Nakamoto retreated from the public eye.


How Does Proof-of-Stake Work?: In PoS systems, staking involves “locking up” a certain amount of cryptocurrency in a wallet as a commitment to supporting the network. This process signals a validator’s dedication to maintaining the network’s security and reliability.
Validators in PoS are chosen to propose and validate blocks of transactions based on the tokens they have staked. While different networks have unique selection criteria, generally, a larger stake improves the odds of selection, as higher-staked validators have more to lose by acting maliciously.
Validators are rewarded for correctly validating transactions, usually with transaction fees or additional tokens. However, to ensure trustworthiness, PoS systems penalize malicious or incorrect actions. If a validator acts against the network’s interests, a portion or all of their staked tokens may be forfeited — a process known as “slashing.”


Mining is the act of producing units of a cryptocurrency (such as bitcoins) through some kind of effort. The effort is required so that people can't just create infinite amounts of the digital currency, which would devalue it. In bitcoin, mining requires computing power. Here is a detailed description of how mining works. Bitcoin mining is the process of making computer hardware do mathematical calculations for the Bitcoin network to confirm transactions and increase security. As a reward for their services, Bitcoin miners can collect transaction fees for the transactions they confirm, along with newly created bitcoins. Mining is a specialized and competitive market where the rewards are divided up according to how much calculation is done. Not all Bitcoin users do Bitcoin mining, and it is not an easy way to make money.


Whom Do You Trust?: One important area of your life where trust plays a crucial role is your personal finances. Most people in the U.S. feel comfortable trusting a third party to store their savings. Likewise, while some worry about the fluctuations in their stock portfolio, they usually aren’t worried about their assets disappearing from their account. This is because there’s a widespread baseline of trust in the banking and financial technology (FinTech) sector.
However, the advent of blockchain tech and cryptocurrencies has brought about a new understanding of trust. Blockchain-enabled decentralized applications (dApps) allow you to trust in a process or transaction without having to trust the entity with which you are transacting. This simple, yet revolutionary concept has major implications on our relationship with our personal finances, and far beyond into our everyday lives.


What is Proof-of-Stake (PoS)?: A proof-of-stake consensus mechanism is one in which validator nodes — those responsible for confirming cryptocurrency transactions and maintaining the blockchain network — are selected based on the number of coins they stake or lock up, as collateral. 
Unlike PoW, which requires miners to compete by solving complex mathematical problems, PoS allows validators to participate based on their economic stake in the network. The proof-of-stake system was designed as an eco-friendly alternative to PoW, which requires less energy due to its computational demands. In PoS, validators are incentivized to act in the network’s best interest since they risk losing their stake if they act maliciously or negligently. 
This alignment of economic incentives with network security has made PoS increasingly popular, especially among new projects and networks transitioning from PoW to PoS, such as Ethereum.


Do You Trust Yourself?: Although non-custodial wallets don’t require third party trust, you must be ready to trust yourself. If your wallet is inaccessible or damaged; or if your password is forgotten, you could lose access to your funds completely. Non-custodial wallets with significant funds should be protected with a PIN. Make sure to store your PIN securely offline in written form, keep it a secret, and don’t give anyone physical access to your hardware wallet.
Like your cash wallet, you should do your best to protect your hardware crypto wallet from physical theft. However, should anyone gain physical access to it, they still would not have access to your funds without the PIN. PIN-protected, your funds wouldn’t be accessible to the thief and you would be able to regenerate your hardware wallet’s holdings on another hardware device with a recovery phrase.


What is Scalability?: Scalability with regard to a blockchain protocol refers to the blockchain’s ability to support high transactional throughput and future growth. This means that as use cases and adoption accelerate, the performance of the blockchain won’t suffer. Blockchains that perform poorly as adoption increases are said to lack scalability. The Blockchain Trilemma tells us that greater scalability is possible, but security, decentralization, or both, will suffer as a consequence. Scalability is the only way for blockchain networks to reasonably compete with legacy, centralized platforms whose network settlement times and usability are, at this point, far superior. While many blockchain platforms have established decentralization and security, achieving scalability remains the major challenge for today’s leading decentralized networks.
So how can we solve the Blockchain Trilemma and achieve decentralization, security, and scalability simultaneously? The answer comes in the form of Layer-1 and Layer-2 solutions.


What is Blockchain Security?: To increase network throughput on a blockchain network, there's an incentive to reduce the distribution of blockchain nodes either geographically, in number, or both. However, this pivot toward greater centralization reduces security on PoW networks. When consensus is achieved on an open network with limited nodal distribution, a 51% attack is more probable as hackers can amass the required hashing power with greater ease. By overwhelming a network, hackers can hijack the network and manipulate transactions for financial gain. For example: In August 2020, the Ethereum Classic (ETC) blockchain — which is a fork of Ethereum (ETH) —  suffered three 51% attacks that reorganized more than 4,000 blocks. This allowed the perpetrators to manipulate data and double spend its ETC currency, resulting in the loss of millions of dollars in value on the network. Blockchain security is a critical network aspect that cannot be compromised.


Can Anyone Generate My Private Keys? Do I Need to Generate My Own Private Keys?: No one can generate your private keys if they don’t have access to them or the accompanying seed phrase. That’s why keeping your private keys and seed phrase confidential is of utmost importance. Usually, when you create a wallet, you’ll be asked or required to generate a seed phrase. This should be written down offline and kept private.
This seed phrase would allow you to “regenerate” your wallet and private key should you ever lose them. Many recommend that you make a few copies of your seed phrase neatly in pen and store them in secure locations. Some break this phrase in two parts and store them separately for extra security. You can also laminate the paper note that contains the seed phrase, or  purchase a seed phrase back-up device that will stamp your seed phrase in steel.


What’s Happening With Mt. Gox Now?: Currently, users who held funds on the platform are finally beginning to receive re-repayment for the balances they held on the platform. The trustee, Nobuaki Kobayashi, has started distributing funds to creditors. The repayment process involves several tranches, including basic repayment, early lump-sum repayment, and intermediate repayment. While some creditors have already received payments, the entire process is expected to continue until at least October 31, 2024, due to the complexity and scale of the claims​. 
The case of Mt. Gox was a critical event that served as a regulatory wake-up call for the cryptocurrency industry. It underscored the necessity for more comprehensive security measures and robust regulatory frameworks to protect investors and maintain market stability. While the financial effects are still being felt to this day, it will continue to be remembered as a watershed moment for our collective understanding of best practices for storing and protecting digital assets.


How Are New Bitcoins Created?: Bitcoin miners create Bitcoin through mining. This process involves computers solving complex cryptographic puzzles to validate transactions and safeguard the network. When miners successfully solve these puzzles, they add a new block to the blockchain and are rewarded with new bitcoins. This process of issuance, known as proof-of-work, is the cornerstone of Bitcoin’s decentralized security infrastructure. Bitcoin mining is like solving complex puzzles that require a lot of energy from specialized computers. Initially, anyone could mine Bitcoin using a standard computer, but today, mining requires specialized hardware and substantial energy. Many miners now explore renewable energy options to offset environmental impact.
People within this industry are now looking for a green solution that can easily be produced from solar and hydroelectric power. Though mining is energy-intensive, the use of renewable energy is making Bitcoin mining increasingly efficient. Plus, new technologies contribute to decreasing the general carbon emission of mining and maintaining the system’s steadiness and flexibility against attacks.


What Is an Airdrop?: A cryptocurrency airdrop is an initiative undertaken by a crypto project with a native coin or token to distribute its cryptocurrency to current or potential users — usually for free — in a digital asset giveaway. Airdrops serve multiple purposes: marketing, creating liquidity, and helping to establish equitable governance mechanisms by decentralizing the crypto holdings of a platform. Crypto airdrop recipients are typically determined based on prior or current participation in another existing network such as Bitcoin or Ethereum, or through a crypto exchange or wallet.
Receiving coins or tokens via an airdrop is a relatively simple process. Often, you just need to provide a valid receiving wallet address to the project that is distributing the tokens. Some initiatives require that you engage with the party carrying out the airdrop by sharing a promotional social media post, completing a survey, or subscribing to a mailing list. It’s also possible to receive an airdrop simply by being a user of an exchange participating in a crypto airdrop.


Do I Need To Restore My Wallet on an Identical Device?: If a hardware wallet manufacturer stops operations, you can regenerate your wallet on any other hardware wallet because the recovery phrase for hardware wallets uses a universal standard. Some wallets accept recovery phrases of any length, while others may require you to convert a 24-word phrase into a 12-word phrase.
You could even restore your hardware wallet on a non-custodial software wallet if necessary, though that’s not a preferred practice. You can get a non-custodial software wallet by downloading an app on your computer or cell phone. This non-custodial software wallet would give you complete control of your keys, as opposed to using a wallet hosted by an exchange, for example. Instead, however, many people would recommend purchasing two identical hardware wallets, whether or not you regenerate your wallet immediately on the backup hardware wallet device. Doing this will also ensure that you are familiar with the controls of the backup hardware wallet, an important point because the set-up and functionality can vary somewhat between hardware wallet manufacturers.


What Are the Benefits Using Proof-of-Stake Instead of Proof-of-Work?: (1) Energy Efficiency- Because PoS does not require the vast computational resources necessary for PoW, it uses a fraction of the energy. Some estimates indicate PoS reduces energy consumption by over 99% compared to PoW. (2) Scalability - PoS allows networks to handle more transactions per second, improving scalability and making it ideal for networks aiming to expand and enhance user experience. Networks operating under PoS can support higher transaction volumes, which is essential as blockchain adoption grows. (3) Security
By requiring validators to stake tokens, PoS aligns their economic interests with the network’s stability. The threat of slashing acts as a strong deterrent against malicious actions, as validators have a significant financial incentive to act honestly. This approach enhances security, even in decentralized environments. (4) Decentralization
PoS can support decentralization by offering staking pools and delegation options. Smaller holders who might not have the resources to become full validators can pool their stakes or delegate them to a larger validator. This inclusivity enables broader participation in the network’s operations, enhancing decentralization.


Are Privacy Tokens Legal?: While privacy tokens offer various degrees of anonymity to their users, their legality varies between jurisdictions, and between platforms. In South Korea, Japan and Australia, the use of privacy tokens is prohibited entirely. In the US, their use is not banned, but certain privacy enhancing platforms (including the notorious coin-mixer Tornado Cash) have been. In Europe, the new Markets in Crypto Assets (MiCA) regulation will reportedly introduce new requirements for privacy tokens in order for them to be compliant. 
The privacy features of these tokens can appeal to malicious actors seeking to obfuscate the source of stolen funds, or to preserve their identity after engaging in other illegal activity. For this reason, many privacy tokens fail to meet the listing requirements imposed by centralized crypto exchanges. 
While some exchanges have opted to ban privacy tokens, many privacy token users simply value crypto’s original tenants of financial control and are not engaged in anything illegal.  But regardless of one’s stance on their use, privacy tokens serve a distinct purpose within the ecosystem, and demand for them is likely to remain high.


Should You Be Concerned About Double-Spending Attacks?: As long as you don’t accept unconfirmed transactions, you shouldn’t need to worry about double-spending attacks. Most wallets and exchanges will label transactions that haven’t been confirmed as “unconfirmed.” In addition, the longer you wait, the more secure the transaction is. Having more than a few blocks written to the Bitcoin blockchain in front of the block with your transaction makes the chance of a reversal very small.
The recommended wait time depends on the amount sent and what blockchain you’re using. For Bitcoin payments of less than $1,000, one confirmation is widely considered safe. For payments up to $10,000, three confirmations is standard practice. Many recommend six confirmations for very large transactions. On the Bitcoin network, confirmations happen for every block approximately once every 10 minutes. Some blockchain networks have much shorter block confirmation times, ranging from seconds to a few minutes.
Double-spending attacks have been studied and discussed extensively in the blockchain community. As long as you don’t accept unconfirmed transactions, you can accept Bitcoin payments confident that the chance of a double-spending attack is quite small.


How Does Bitcoin Cash Work?: Bitcoin Cash is settled using a larger block size (which is 4-8 times larger than BTC, depending on the use of Segregated Witness) to process transactions more quickly.
These transactions are quick enough that you could make a grab-and-go retail purchase with BCH (like a cup of coffee), but if you were making a large purchase such as a car or a house, you could opt for a slower, more secure cryptocurrency like BTC.
BCH and BTC, therefore, fulfill different roles. Not every cryptocurrency is a store of value, and not every cryptocurrency needs to process data quickly to function like a credit card transaction. It makes sense to use different tools for different tasks — much like using a credit card for restaurant dining and a bank transfer to buy a house.
Ultimately, BCH is faster and features lower processing fees than BTC, but is still used less frequently as everyday cryptocurrency payments have yet to be widely adopted. Over time, many believe that greater awareness and complementary technological improvements and innovations will pave the way for BCH to serve as a leader in cryptocurrency payments.


What is a Rollup?: Rollups are regular smart contracts on the Ethereum mainnet that serve as the relay between the mainchain and Layer 2, where computations occur. Rollups have become a popular Layer-2 scaling solution for blockchain networks. These protocols store transaction data on the mainchain but move transaction activity to a sidechain. However, because the mainchain and sidechain are interoperable, they run in parallel and continue to communicate. As a result, blockchain networks become more scalable as computationally intensive processes move off the mainchain, which reduces congestion. For example, the Ethereum mainchain is currently capable of processing 15 transactions per second (TPS). By implementing rollups, this number can reach up to 1,000 TPS, as only critical smart contract data is communicated back to the mainchain and the majority of data remains on the sidechain. The term "rollup" refers to the process of rolling transactions into a single block before publishing the validated transactions to the mainchain.
Across the blockchain ecosystem, several projects are integrating rollup infrastructure with sidechains to create secure, privacy-preserving protocols. In doing so, they aim to balance the competing priorities outlined by the Blockchain Trilemma: security, scalability, and decentralization.


What are the Risks Associated with Proof-of-Stake?: Centralization Risks- PoS networks face concerns about potential central authority, as larger holders have a higher chance of being selected as validators and, over time, could accumulate disproportionate influence. If these stakeholders acquire too much control, they could affect decision-making and governance on the network, challenging the network’s decentralized ideals. Security Concerns- Although PoS offers great security, validators are still required to maintain strict security practices. Malicious actors or compromised validators could theoretically disrupt the network. Networks attempt to mitigate this through slashing and reputation systems, but validators need to exercise caution and follow best practices. Liquidity Constraints - Staking locks up funds for extended periods, reducing liquidity for holders. In some cases, PoS networks have mechanisms allowing staked tokens to be traded in secondary markets, but this can be complex and may incur additional fees. Technical Complexity -
Setting up and managing a staking operation can be more complex than simply holding tokens. Validators need to stay current on network protocols and ensure they meet security standards, as any misstep could lead to slashing penalties. Those considering staking should assess their ability to manage these responsibilities effectively.


How Bitcoin Pizza Day Became a Crypto Holiday?: There isn’t much evidence to suggest that this event was widely celebrated or marked on many calendars. It was only in 2014 — corresponding with BTC’s notable price appreciation at the time —  that this bitcoin-for-pizza transactional event hit the headlines. After receiving both mainstream and crypto press coverage, the story went viral on social media. This led to the coinage of the phrase “Bitcoin Pizza Day,” and initiated what has gone on to become an annual event for many within the crypto community and beyond.
Bitcoin Pizza Day has grown from news to meme to a full-blown Bitcoin and crypto holiday. Each year sees a proliferation of opportunities for free swag and crypto, contests, charity initiatives, and of course — delicious pizza. You can find Bitcoin Pizza Day mugs, hats, t-shirts, and even BTC Pizza Day-themed hardware wallets. Perhaps more importantly, the 10,000 bitcoin pizza kickstarted bitcoin adoption and led to other people and companies accepting BTC as a currency for payment. Now, it’s commonplace for banks, websites, retail outlets, and individuals to accept payments in BTC and many cryptocurrencies — and Bitcoin Pizza Day is where it all began.


Trust vs. Trustless in Crypto: The concept of trustlessness is a core element of blockchain, crypto payments, and smart contracts. “Trustless” means that you don’t have to trust a third party: a bank, a person, or any intermediary that could operate between you and your cryptocurrency transactions or holdings. Depending on how you choose to store, move, and trade your assets, you may have a trustless set-up or a set-up that requires the trust of a third party.
“Don’t trust; verify!” and “In Bitcoin we trust” are trustlessness-related phrases you may come across as you explore the cryptocurrency space. If you are new to crypto, you may ask yourself: “How can I trust code?” If you’re familiar with Bitcoin, you likely already know the answer. Essentially, these networks are censorship-resistant and decentralized, featuring enhanced security protocols. When you send a transaction, it’s permanent, and the sender can’t reverse the payment. If you’ve ever been on the receiving end of a bounced check, reverted credit card payment, or reversed Paypal transaction, you can likely see how revolutionary this is.
The implications for global commerce are significant. Furthermore, the trustless component of blockchains goes far beyond payments and includes implications for crypto self-custody, smart contracts, and asset trading solutions.


Is Cryptocurrency Money?: A frequently asked question is whether cryptocurrency can be defined as ‘money’. The short answer is that cryptocurrency is not a form of money. To understand why, we can ask whether the characteristics of cryptocurrencies match the key characteristics of money: (1) Widely accepted means of payment – can cryptocurrencies be used to buy and sell things? Money generally comes in the form of a nation's currency, and is widely accepted as a means of payment. While cryptocurrencies can be used to buy and sell things, they are not widely accepted as a means of payment, and surveys suggest that only a small fraction of cryptocurrency holders use them regularly for payments. (2) Store of value – can the purchasing power of cryptocurrencies (their ability to purchase a similar basket of goods and services) be maintained over time? Large fluctuations in the price of many cryptocurrencies mean that their purchasing power is not maintained over time, reducing their effectiveness as a store of value. (3) Unit of account – are cryptocurrencies a common way of measuring the value of goods and services? In Australia, the prices of goods and services are measured in Australian dollars. While some businesses may accept cryptocurrencies as payment, they are not commonly used to measure and compare prices.


How to Withdraw Funds From a Crypto Exchange Wallet: While some choose to keep large amounts of cryptocurrency on exchange wallets, others choose to withdraw the majority of their funds after making crypto purchases. These withdrawn funds may be sent to non-custodial wallets, which give you complete control of your private keys. These wallets could be on your phone, your computer, or a specialized device that looks like a USB stick called a hardware wallet. 
To move your funds, you typically paste the public address destination of where you want to send your funds into your crypto exchange account. You must make sure the cryptocurrency you are sending and the crypto wallet you are sending it to match up: bitcoin goes to a bitcoin wallet address and ether goes to an ether wallet address, and so on. Not doing so will lead to lost funds. It’s advisable to send a small test transaction prior to sending the full amount if you’re new to moving crypto.
It’s worth noting that you can transfer ownership of cryptocurrency to your non-custodial wallet without it ever having to be “online,” with just the wallet’s public key. In fact, the copy of the corresponding private key could be sitting in a safe and you would still be able to transfer crypto to your wallet with your public key.


How Does a Cryptocurrency Transaction Work?: Cryptocurrency transactions occur through electronic messages that are sent to the entire network with instructions about the transaction. The instructions include information such as the electronic addresses of the parties involved, the quantity of currency to be traded, and a time stamp.
Suppose Alice wants to transfer one unit of cryptocurrency to Bob. Alice starts the transaction by sending an electronic message with her instructions to the network, where all users can see the message. Alice's transaction is one of a number of transactions that have recently been sent. Since the system is not instantaneous, the transaction sits with a group of other recent transactions waiting to be compiled into a block (which is just a group of the most recent transactions). The information from the block is turned into a cryptographic code and miners compete to solve the code to add the new block of transactions to the blockchain.
Once a miner successfully solves the code, other users of the network check the solution and reach an agreement that it is valid. The new block of transactions is added to the end of the blockchain, and Alice's transaction is confirmed. (This confirmation is not instant as it takes time for six blocks of transactions to be processed so that users can be certain that their transaction has been successful.)


Can I Make my Own Private Keys?: Yes, and you do not need a digital wallet to make them. It is possible to make your own private keys in a low-tech way that is sufficiently random, such as recording a large series of dice rolls. You can also use a website such as Bitaddress, which will generate the public and private keys for you as hexadecimal addresses and Quick Response (QR) codes. You can also print these addresses and use them to create a paper wallet, a type of non-custodial cold storage wallet created by printing private keys on a piece of paper.
Most would argue against storing large sums of cryptocurrency this way. People usually create paper wallets with small amounts of crypto to give as gifts, perhaps to interest others in cryptocurrencies. Other people make them to learn or simply for fun.
HD wallets, or hierarchical-deterministic wallets, do a great job of securing your funds, and you don’t need to be an expert to use one. An HD wallet generates new cryptographic key pairs or addresses from a master key pair each time funds are received. HD crypto wallet technology ensures that private keys are almost never handled, or even seen, by the user. The user will usually be given a 12-, 18-, or 24-word seed phrase that encodes the same information as the private keys.


Why Is Bitcoin Valuable?: With so many crypto projects achieving remarkable market valuations, many people have become curious as to how these cryptocurrencies are valued. This is especially true when it comes to Bitcoin, which is the first ever blockchain platform, digital asset, and the largest cryptocurrency in terms of total market cap. Unlike cryptocurrencies that are backed by a physical asset such as gold or the U.S. dollar, bitcoin (BTC) is entirely digital and uncollateralized, and miners create new bitcoin every day. This begs the question of how bitcoin’s price has skyrocketed from fractions of a cent to tens of thousands of dollars over the past decade.
In order to properly explain what gives bitcoin its value, it’s essential to consider how other popular investments and financial assets get their value. Publicly-traded stocks generally have value because they represent an equity share of a company that produces goods or services that can be exchanged for money. Similarly, commodities like oil and lumber tend to have intrinsic value since they are directly used to manufacture new goods, keep a business running, or enable other means of value creation. However, not everything that is considered valuable today necessarily has intrinsic value.
But what about digital currencies? Why is bitcoin valuable? Bitcoin derives its value from many of the reasons we have discussed above. Now let’s take a deeper look into the qualities that give bitcoin its value.


What’s the pros and cons of hot wallets?: Web-based wallets, mobile wallets, and desktop wallets are all typically hot wallets. Among them, web wallets are the least secure, though all crypto hot wallets are vulnerable to online attacks.
A benefit to hot wallets is ease-of-use. Because they are always online, there’s no need to transition between offline and online to make a cryptocurrency transaction. For example, many people use mobile hot wallets to trade or make purchases with cryptocurrency. To do so with a cold wallet would be inconvenient. You would need to find a device (typically a computer) in which to plug your cold wallet, then move the requisite amount of cryptocurrency to a hot wallet, and then make your purchase.
Users who hold large amounts of cryptocurrency typically won’t keep significant amounts of crypto in hot wallets. Although a hot mobile wallet isn’t the same as a traditional analog wallet, one similarity holds true: It’s generally a bad idea to keep a lot of money on your person. Just like you can withdraw cash from an ATM, you can send more crypto to your hot wallet when the balance gets low.
Most well-respected exchanges store the majority of their customers’ funds offline in a matrix of cold wallets, and then keep a certain amount needed for withdrawals in hot wallets. If you’re storing significant amounts of cryptocurrency online, be sure to research the reputation of the exchange you’re using.


Nowadays with technology, people are changing their ways of doing online transactions; they are seen using Cryptocurrency Wallets. With the prosperity of human economic activities and the development of science and technology, the currency pattern has been constantly changing. Investing Cryptocurrency is like putting money in the bank. After the 1980s, under the support of modern information technology, new currency forms such as electronic money, virtual currency, and digital cryptocurrency emerged one after another. Bitcoin is the most well-known cryptocurrency, and has been in existence since 2009, invented by Satoshi Nakamoto while publishing it in 2008. It has experienced different stages such as physical currency, silver standard, gold standard metal currency and credit currency. Cryptocurrency wallet is a software program that stores the public and private keys and interacts with various blockchain to enable users to send and receive digital currency and monitor their balance. The use of Cryptocurrency has been rising in Africa which has been one of the largest economies. According to Statista on “How Common is Crypto” mentioned that Nigeria, one of the African Countries, has been using and owning Cryptocurrency in which they send or receive money all around the world. They have been using Cryptocurrency in their daily lives. There has been a statistical growth since Nigeria began using Cryptocurrency more. There have been higher rates not only in Nigeria but numerous other Countries such as Vietnam, South Africa, Turkey, United States, Peru, Spain, Germany, and Japan.


How to Choose the Right Crypto Wallet?
Mixing it up with both hardware and software wallets might be your best bet. Think of it like this: your hardware wallet is like a savings account for the bulk of your investments, super secure but not as quick to access. Your software wallet, on the other hand, is like your wallet for daily spending—easier to access but holding just a small amount of money.This hybrid approach helps you keep most of your investments safe while still letting you easily trade or use some of your cryptocurrencies. 
How Do Public and Private Keys Work Together?: Public and private keys work together to enable secure transactions. The public key is used to generate addresses where funds can be received, while the private key provides access to those funds.
A digital signature ensures that only the owner of the private key can authorize transactions. When you send a transaction, your wallet uses your private key to "sign" it, creating a unique signature. This signature proves that the transaction was authorized by the holder of the private key. The network then uses your public key to verify the authenticity of the signature. Imagine you want to send money from your wallet to another wallet. To do this, your private key "signs" the transaction, proving that you own the funds and are authorizing the transfer. The network uses your public key to verify the signature and ensure the transaction is valid—all without ever exposing your private key.


Is Decentralization What Gives Value to Bitcoin?: The above features are possible because Bitcoin is a decentralized, algorithmically driven project. Decentralization is a core feature of many cryptocurrencies and refers to projects that are powered by a distributed web of individual users who collectively verify transactions and store a record of everything that happens on the network. In other words, decentralized crypto projects like Bitcoin are less subject to human decision-making than their centralized counterparts in the traditional finance world, because they do not need to rely on a centralized party to sign off on transactions, secure the network, or remove dishonest actors.
By cutting out centralized intermediaries, Bitcoin can give more power and freedom to its community of users. Practically anyone can participate in the Bitcoin mining process, which not only results in new BTC at a predictable, steady rate, but also involves the verification and validation of all Bitcoin transactions. No single individual user on the network is meant to make decisions on everyone’s behalf, and all of Bitcoin’s protocols are designed to require group consensus, which helps safeguard the project from mismanagement and abuse. This means that the more users Bitcoin has, the more secure it becomes, since the project’s governance is shared across more individuals and therefore becomes more difficult to tamper with. While most Bitcoin advocates cite a combination of the reasons mentioned above, for many the decentralized structure is the key feature of bitcoin, what gives it value, and how it can be a bulwark against financial censorship.


Do Decentralized Exchanges Make Trading Trustless?: One trustless option that has been evolving in the crypto trading sphere is the decentralized exchange (DEX). When a centralized exchange uses an order book, market maker, or liquidity provider to facilitate your trades, they must be trusted as an intermediary to oversee and transact the trade. Considering they already control your funds via your centralized exchange wallet, most traders aren’t too concerned about this.
For those who have withdrawn their funds to a non-custodial wallet, how do they trade while maintaining trustlessness? This is possible via trading on a DEX where the trades are executed via smart contracts. One popular example of this is Uniswap, where you can swap ERC-20 tokens while maintaining control of your private keys.
These trustless trades can be executed through the use of atomic swaps, smart contracts that rely almost exclusively on decentralized code for enforcement rather than on a third party. In short, both sets of crypto assets must be submitted into a smart contract for it to execute the transaction. This structure facilitates trustless trades between strangers. If one party inputs funds and the other does not, generally the funds are just returned to the sender automatically.
For some users, there are potential downsides to relying on such types of trustless systems as well. For example, in a DEX all trades must generally be executed on-chain. This means trades may in some cases be subject to higher transaction fees than would be the case with a CEX. Even failed orders must be validated on-chain, triggering further fees.


What Impact Did Mt. Gox Have on Regulation?: The large-scale financial harm caused by the incident made clear the risks of holding digital assets with an untrustworthy third party, and the collapse of the exchange had a significant impact on the cryptocurrency regulatory landscape. It highlighted the vulnerabilities within the industry and prompted significant changes in how digital assets are managed. Below are just a few areas in which this change occurred. (1) Increased Regulation: The exchange’s downfall shed light on the significant security flaws that existed within the cryptocurrency market. It captured the attention of regulators and policymakers globally, leading to  demand for more robust regulatory frameworks to protect investors and ensure the stability of financial markets​. Countries began developing and implementing these frameworks to provide clear guidelines for cryptocurrency exchanges. This included requirements for registration, licensing, and compliance with anti-money laundering (AML) and know-your-customer (KYC) regulations. (2) Exchange Security Improvements: The incident also underscored the need for cryptocurrency exchanges to adopt higher standards of security. Exchanges were encouraged to enhance their control mechanisms for custody of funds, conduct regular financial audits, and implement superior risk management practices to protect users. (3) Global Change: Japan, where Mt. Gox was based, became one of the first countries to implement comprehensive regulations for cryptocurrency exchanges. The Financial Services Agency (FSA) introduced licensing requirements, setting a precedent for other countries to follow​​. As it stands, all of the G20 nations have implemented crypto regulation into law – with many more countries around the world adopting crypto legislation to protect investors and their economies.


Blockchain Oracles Explained: Why Do We Need Oracles?: Before we dive into what oracles actually are, it is helpful to understand why they were created and the problem they aim to solve.  Oracles are complex computerized systems that connect data from the outside world (off-chain) with the blockchain world (on-chain).
Most blockchains have native cryptocurrencies that are used to transfer value, enable the operations of the protocol, or facilitate governance. Some blockchains also enable smart contracts: computer programs that run within a blockchain protocol and execute a predetermined set of actions automatically when certain conditions are met in a traceable and irreversible manner. Smart contracts are executed without a third party, and can be designed to carry out almost any contract imaginable.
For example, if you were purchasing a house with cryptocurrency, a simple smart contract might be drafted for the sale. It would say something like “if person A sends the required funds to person B, then the deed for the house is transferred from person B to person A.” Once the conditions of the smart contract are met, it is irreversibly executed according to its coded programming. There is no need to rely on traditional third parties to initiate or execute the contract.
However, there needs to be a way for blockchains and on-chain smart contracts to make use of external, off-chain data in order for smart contracts to have any real-world applications. In the above example of a real estate transaction, off-chain data might be proof of successful payment, or proof of receipt of the deed. And as blockchains are self-contained systems, this is where oracles come into play.


How SushiSwap Changed the DeFi Community?: SushiSwap’s vampire attack of Uniswap sent a clear message to other leading DeFi protocols. If they did not meet the community and industry’s expectations, they could be forked. It became starkly clear that the DeFi community is both dynamic and capable of pursuing an activist agenda — one that can easily be redirected to competitors that offer more agreeable economic incentives and governance. Case in point: Since launching the UNI token, Uniswap has regained its place at the top of the DeFi stack, and the entire ecosystem is stronger than ever.
The SushiSwap vampire attack phenomenon highlighted several emergent trends in the DeFi ecosystem. First, projects have come under pressure to decentralize and cede control of their protocols to their communities — a process usually enacted by introducing governance tokens that platform users can utilize to vote on the platform’s future. Secondly, as evidenced by platforms like Yearn.finance, the DeFi community has increasingly called for “fair launches” of governance tokens, in which no one entity — including project founders — has an unfair advantage in obtaining tokens.
By introducing a polarizing new business strategy at a large scale with its vampire attack on Uniswap, SushiSwap changed the dynamics of the DeFi community — and perhaps the entire blockchain industry. Although SushiSwap might be the first project to execute such an attack, it likely will not be the last. SushiSwap’s vampire attack highlights the dynamic relationship between decentralized networks, open-source projects, and a distributed global community of active investors and speculators. The interactions among these players are defining and changing the parameters of what is still a very new and exciting sector of finance.


Hot Wallet, Cold Wallet, or Both?
A hot wallet is always, or almost always, connected to the internet. Because you need to be connected to the internet to transact, this is the most convenient type of crypto wallet. A hot wallet can be web-based or it could be an application downloaded on your phone or computer. Your crypto exchange wallet, where the cryptocurrency you purchased on an exchange will end up, is one example of a hot wallet. The downside of hot wallets is that their constant internet connection makes them more vulnerable to hacking than cold wallets.
A cold wallet, on the other hand, is a wallet that is almost always disconnected from the internet, making it extraordinarily hard to hack. Typically, cold wallets come in the form of a crypto hardware wallet — a specialized device that is plugged into your USB port or accessible via bluetooth. This is considered the most secure type of crypto wallet, but lacks the convenience of a hot wallet that would allow you to trade and transfer your cryptocurrency funds quickly.
While a crypto hardware wallet must be connected via personal computer to the internet to make a transaction and interact with the blockchain, the “signing” of the transaction itself happens “in-device,” meaning when your private keys are used to sign a transaction they remain on your device away from potential bad actors. A crypto hardware wallet will therefore still be considered a cold wallet even while in use. Most of the time this device is offline and is generally used for long-term storage of large amounts of crypto. Paper wallets are also cold wallets, but they are no longer widely recommended as a way to store your keys.


“In Code We Trust” — Are There Truly “Trustless” Systems?: While many expound upon how blockchains have eliminated the need for trust, others argue that this trust has simply been transferred — from one set of people and systems to another set of code and consensus mechanisms that run these networks and everything built on them. For example, you have to trust the code to be bug-free. At various points in the development of the burgeoning decentralized finance (DeFi) space, users of trustless systems have experienced malfunctions in trustless platforms, and have even lost their funds due to malicious hackers exploiting vulnerabilities in the code of trustless systems.
Proponents of trustless systems would counter that these blockchains have become increasingly safer and more robust as the DeFi space has evolved. Since blockchain networks generally do not have a central point of failure, trustless systems are practically impossible to shut down. Smart contract audit procedures, bug bounty programs, and better coding procedures in the industry are making these networks increasingly resilient to hacking and malicious actors. Indeed, with billions of U.S. dollars locked in DeFi protocols, it seems that an increasing number of people feel comfortable putting trust in these trustless systems. You can also purchase smart contract insurance to help protect yourself against potential losses.
In crypto, you don’t necessarily have to trust any other person (or institution), but there is someone you must trust: yourself. While the self-custody of crypto is referred to as trustless, you must decide if you can trust yourself with this responsibility. This entails safely storing any passwords, having a recovery phrase, and following other best practices. If your passwords are lost or stolen, you might not be able to recover your funds.


Where’s My Change?: You may know that bitcoin (BTC) and similar cryptocurrencies include a change output as part of the transaction process. If you spend only a portion of the funds on a paper wallet, the rest will be sent to a change address. If you don’t set up this change address before transacting, then your excess funds will be gone. Let’s say you have 100 BTC in your paper wallet, and you only spend 0.50 BTC assuming the other 99.5 BTC will still be there. Unfortunately, if you don’t set up a change address, it’s gone — and it’s not coming back. This is another reason why other wallet alternatives are preferred over paper wallets.
This brings us to “sweeping” vs. “importing” keys. Importing a key from your paper wallet to another wallet simply creates a copy; spending a portion of the funds would still create the change-address dilemma mentioned above, wherein you would need to create a change address or else risk losing some of your funds. This is true even if you spend a portion of the imported key funds using your software wallet.
Conversely, “sweeping” a paper wallet sends the crypto balance to a new private key on your software wallet. This enables you to safely spend a portion of the “swept” balance and have the change, in the form of a change output, sent automatically to the software wallet you used to sweep it. In most cases, sweeping is the preferred method for transferring funds from a paper wallet.
Using a single paper private key repeatedly as a wallet can be dangerous from a security and privacy standpoint. Instead, you should either use it only once to receive and send funds, or create multiple keys manually. The latter option is quite complicated, time-consuming, and may lead to re-using an address accidentally or losing a key.


What Gives Bitcoin Value? Easy To Move & Difficult To Take?: Bitcoin scarcity alone is a major draw for many investors and Bitcoin proponents, but it has other benefits that can add to its intrinsic value. For other proponents of Bitcoin, what gives it value is the ability to transfer large amounts of value at a relatively low cost as compared to traditional alternatives. While it can be relatively expensive to send a small amount of BTC, it’s also possible to send millions of dollars’ worth of BTC to any other Bitcoin-compatible crypto address for a relatively minimal fee.
This ability to serve as a borderless digital currency is common among crypto projects, and is not unique to Bitcoin. However, since Bitcoin is the largest and most battle-tested cryptocurrency in the world, it has achieved a formidable status as the most widely trusted and relied-upon cryptocurrency in existence. And while Bitcoin’s transaction fees are higher than many other cryptocurrencies, its Lightning Network upgrade makes it less costly and more efficient to send smaller transactions. The Lightning Network also enables the creation of new digital products and services on the Bitcoin network.
Bitcoin is also nearly impossible to confiscate, so long as users implement a non-custodial crypto wallet to store their BTC and protect the private keys to their crypto addresses. Most BTC thefts occur when a user compromises their account by accidentally sharing their password through a phishing attack or other form of cybercrime, or by using a disreputable or poorly-secured crypto exchange with an exploitable single point of failure. The self-sovereignty Bitcoin provides may not be a key value proposition in developed countries that have sophisticated banks and financial checks and balances in place. However, hundreds of millions of people around the world do not have access to modern financial services, and even those who do may not want to rely on financial institutions.


What’s the Pros and Cons of Cold Wallets?: Generally, cold storage wallets are quite secure. Stealing from a cold wallet usually would require physical possession of or access to the cold wallet, as well as any associated PINs or passwords that must be used to access the funds. Most hardware wallets are cold wallets and live on devices that look like a small to medium-sized USB stick. Paper wallets, physical bitcoins, or a secondary offline computer used to store cryptocurrency are also cold storage wallet options. However, while still fairly secure, these methods have fallen out of favor and been replaced by reputable, high-quality hardware wallets or very secure cold-storage options available on reputable exchanges.
Hardware wallets are designed to be immune to hacking. Even when a hardware wallet is plugged into your computer or connected via Bluetooth, depending on the storage method, the funds stored on the drive are difficult or even impossible to steal. While technically connected to the internet, the signing of transactions is done “in-device,” and only subsequently broadcast to the network via your computer’s internet connection. This “signature” allows you to assign ownership to the recipient of a cryptocurrency transaction. Because your private keys never leave the device, however, even if devious malware on your computer tried to steal your funds by maliciously “signing” a transaction initiated in your hardware wallet it would not be the correct signature so the transaction would not go through.
Hardware wallets are less convenient than hot wallets because they must be powered on and then connected to the internet. In addition, while hot wallets are usually free, hardware wallets can cost you between $50 and $200. If you have more than a few hundred dollars in crypto, you may want to invest in a hardware wallet before purchasing more. It’s a small price to pay to protect yourself from the threat of losing your funds.


How to Prevent Account Takeover Fraud ?: From an account holder perspective, the best protection against ATO attacks is the use of a strong user authentication approach such as 2FA across all online accounts. While this is the easiest and most effective way for internet users to avoid falling victim to an ATO attack, there are a number of other countermeasures which are worth considering: Hardware security keys: One form of 2FA is a hardware security key, such as Yubikey, which you can plug in via USB. These keys provide a strong level of protection by delivering hardware-backed, cryptographic proof of your identity. They ensure that only the holder of the physical hardware key can gain access to an associated account, even if an attacker has compromised your password or successfully executed a SIM-swap attack on your mobile device. This mitigates the risk posed by phishing, person-in-the-middle, and replay attacks that rely on stolen passwords or one-time password (OTP) codes. Secure 2FA: Certain 2FA providers allow users to control the devices that can access that 2FA. Allowing only one device to access the 2FA protects users in the event they are the victim of a sim-swap attack. Double-checking digital communications: Many account takeover attacks gain their first foothold in a target’s account through a successful phishing scam, which can lead to the victim divulging confidential information or inadvertently installing keylogging malware onto their device. Thus, internet users should always be cognizant of phishing attacks and how to identify them, so they can effectively flag potentially misleading communications at the initial point of contact. Secure digital asset storage: While there are pros and cons to spreading your digital assets across multiple accounts and wallets, one reliable method to protect your assets involves keeping them in a cold wallet. While crypto assets in a cold wallet may be harder to access and exchange, these same features make those funds substantially harder to steal even if your account is compromised.


Why Do Crypto Airdrops Happen?: Cryptocurrency airdrops distribute free cryptocurrencies or tokens in exchange for minimal effort on the part of the recipients — so what’s the catch? And why would a new blockchain network with a fledgling cryptocurrency or token send out a portion of its network’s native resources for free? To understand the value proposition for airdrop distributors and receivers alike, it helps to understand the underlying structure of a blockchain network.
A blockchain platform is a distributed global infrastructure made up of decentralized nodes that share the responsibility of maintaining the network, verifying new transactions, and keeping a record of the entire blockchain. A network bolsters its security each time a new node is added because it is one more entity keeping record of the blockchain, which gives the blockchain another layer of redundancy and increases overall network participation with respect to consensus and governance. Network participation is generally a good indicator of the level of a network’s general security. The more nodes that comprise a decentralized network, the more difficult that network becomes to attack or compromise.
Airdrops are often intended to help a new crypto project kickstart the process of gaining both visibility and network participation. By widely distributing free coins or tokens to new recipients, a network can grow incredibly fast. Once a widely distributed crypto airdrop occurs, many people will own the new currency, potentially heightening general awareness of a particular project, increasing its popularity, and democratizing its ownership.
From the perspective of the recipient, many new users are likely motivated primarily by the financial gain — earning free crypto for doing relatively little in return — and may seek to liquidate airdropped assets quickly. However, there remains the possibility that a new user may learn about the project and decide to hold on to newly accrued assets, or even become a user of the airdropping platform. Some cryptocurrency airdrop programs have seen more success than others, but their success is typically more reflective of the value provided by the underlying project than the airdrop itself.


What is Bitcoin Cash?: The Bitcoin (BTC) protocol was designed in 2008, and the network itself went online in January 2009 with the mining of what is called the genesis block — the first block on the Bitcoin blockchain. Over the years, the Bitcoin community grew from a small community of computer scientists and cryptographers to become increasingly mainstream. As Bitcoin adoption grew,  different opinions and strategies about how to accommodate this growth emerged within its core group of developers.
In Bitcoin’s early stages, the network was more than capable of managing the transaction load of a niche community of developers. But as its popularity grew, the network got bogged down with an increasingly large number of transactions, ultimately slowing their processing time. The concern was that eventually if nothing was done, Bitcoin transactions might take days or weeks to clear, which could also require that users pay higher fees to accelerate the process. Neither scenario was ideal, and this became known as Bitcoin’s scalability problem.
Solutions were proposed by two camps: those who sought to increase the block size, and those who sought to keep the block size small. The block size refers to how much data each block in a particular blockchain can contain. Bitcoin’s maximum block size is 1MB, which is not a lot of data by most technological standards. There were, of course, pros and cons on both sides of the debate, but none convincing enough to unite the community of developers.
Because the core developers could not reach a consensus about the appropriate path forward, a hard fork of the original Bitcoin protocol occurred in August 2017. In both soft and hard forks, developers make an update to the original blockchain, which not all of the nodes accept. In the case of a hard fork, the nodes that do accept the update are migrated to a new blockchain and the coins on the new blockchain are separate and unique from the original ones. Thus, Bitcoin Cash (BCH) was born, complete with a unique Bitcoin Cash blockchain and BCH cryptocurrency.


Bitcoin VS Bitcoin Cash?: The Bitcoin Cash fork was a hotbed of controversy. Bitcoin’s early adopters were passionate about the project and believed in its long-term potential. Supporters of both Bitcoin and Bitcoin Cash felt that their way forward was the right one, so the hard fork was the only way both equally passionate groups could proceed.
Supporters of BTC argued that BCH’s increased block size meant that it would be more energy-intensive and costly to run a node. More processing power requirements could theoretically become a barrier for individuals to operate nodes and preserve the decentralized nature of the network. This could in turn open the door for centralized institutions to take control of the network.
Aside from the deep ideological differences between the two camps, the controversy between Bitcoin and Bitcoin Cash also stems from the latter’s appropriation of the Bitcoin name. Although BCH is technically very similar to BTC, many believe that using the Bitcoin name is to some degree disrespectful.
Further, after Bitcoin creator Satoshi Nakamoto’s disappearance from the Bitcoin community, many speculated about what Satoshi’s original vision for Bitcoin truly was. Different accounts of Satoshi’s vision suggest that his original intent was either more aligned with BTC or BCH. The controversy gets especially heated when significant figures in the cryptocurrency community voice assertions on the matter.
For example, an individual named Craig Wright (who has claimed to be Satoshi himself) has expressed that “Bitcoin Cash is Bitcoin,” sparking blowback from both BTC and BCH supporters. Later, Wright distanced himself from the Bitcoin Cash project and helped launch Bitcoin Cash SV (BSV) which went live on November 15, 2018, claiming controversially that Bitcoin SV was the true vision for Satoshi Nakomoto’s Bitcoin.
Despite all the controversy that exists between the two cryptocurrencies, they fulfill largely distinct roles and share only a name. They have different use cases. BTC functions like “digital gold” and operates as a store of value, whereas BCH serves as “digital cash” and aims to be a payment method. Many users understand this and support the further development of both BTC and BCH.


Who Would Perform a Dusting Attack?: There are a number of groups that perform dusting attacks. Criminals have used dusting attacks to de-anonymize those with large cryptocurrency holdings. Those with large holdings can be targeted in a number of ways, including through phishing scams and cyber-extortion. Users with large crypto holdings in high-risk areas could also be physically targeted, or even have a family member kidnapped for a cryptocurrency ransom. A branch of the government such as a tax or law enforcement agency may also perform a dusting attack in order to connect a person or group to an address. Specifically, they may target gangs that deal in contraband, large criminal networks, money launderers, or tax evaders. Mass dusting is also used by blockchain analytics firms, who study crypto dust for academic purposes or have contracts with government agencies.
Importantly, the person or group that executes the dusting attack and the party that analyzes the results don’t need to be the same. Because it’s on the blockchain, anyone with the skills, tools, and time can analyze the crypto dust after an attack. A criminal organization could study a government’s dusting, or a blockchain analytics firm could study a malicious actor's dusting.
For this reason, not all dust attacks are considered “attacks.” The mass spreading of dust has also been used to advertise to cryptocurrency users, primarily by sending out messages included in the crypto dust, comparable to an email blast. You may know that the genesis block of Bitcoin (the first block of bitcoin ever mined) included a message.
These mass dustings may also be used as stress tests, where a large amount of crypto dust is sent in a short amount of time to test the throughput, or bandwidth, of a network. Dustings are also sometimes used as a way to spam a network, by sending huge batches of worthless transactions that clog and slow it down considerably. Whatever the intended purpose, mass dustings can be analyzed for various purposes, both good or bad.
Dusting can also be used as a defensive tool. Let’s say that a large criminal enterprise receives a tip that the authorities are closing in on them. The cyber criminals could dust numerous random wallets to spread the dirty money around in an attempt to throw the authorities off their trail.
There is some debate about how traceable addresses are in dusting attacks. As blockchain analytics improve, better countermeasures emerge. Many governments and firms consider their technology as proprietary and keep it closely guarded. Can you still be traced through dusting despite the various precautions available? We really don’t know yet.


What Is a Vampire Attack?: To understand vampire attacks, you must first be familiar with the fundamentals of automated market makers (AMMs), which are a type of decentralized exchange (DEX). AMMs use liquidity pools — which are collectivized pools of tokens locked in smart contracts — to facilitate the permissionless trading of assets. Unlike a traditional market where buyers and sellers trade with each other, AMM users trade against liquidity pools. The tokens in the liquidity pools are provided by users who, in return, earn a liquidity provider (LP) token that represents their share of the pool. AMMs that have sufficient liquidity are attractive to traders because they can execute larger and faster transactions with lower fees.
When forking the Uniswap code, Nomi recognized that liquidity was essential to making SushiSwap a success. It would be difficult to incentivize users to provide liquidity to a new platform when they could provide it to Uniswap, an established and tested protocol. Because of this, Nomi specified that SushiSwap would offer users two rewards for providing liquidity: First, they would receive SUSHI tokens upon depositing tokens to SushiSwap, and second, they could receive a portion of the protocol’s total fee revenue by staking those SUSHI tokens. Users could therefore earn more revenue by providing liquidity to SushiSwap than providing liquidity to Uniswap.
Importantly, however, users could not deposit just any token to start earning SUSHI — they had to deposit Uniswap LP tokens. Nomi planned to use the deposited Uniswap LP tokens to siphon liquidity from Uniswap. This process — the draining of liquidity from Uniswap to SushiSwap — was dubbed a “vampire attack” or “vampire mining.”
Many users quickly flocked to Uniswap to deposit assets and receive LP tokens, which they then transferred to SushiSwap. Uniswap’s deposits rapidly increased from $300 million to $1.8 billion USD. By the time the migration was over, SushiSwap had gained $810 million worth of tokens — roughly 55% of Uniswap’s liquidity. While the strategy was polarizing, it did not signal the end for Uniswap — quite the opposite, in fact.
Prior to SushiSwap’s launch in August 2020, there was approximately $185 million locked in Uniswap liquidity pools. Uniswap experienced dramatic volatility in the run-up to the migration — up to $1.8 billion then down to $400 million in three days as funds were contributed and then siphoned to SushiSwap. Despite this, the event brought so much value into the DeFi ecosystem that Uniswap’s locked token value rebounded to more than $3 billion during the next two months.
Uniswap then released its own governance token, UNI, to re-incentivize its own community’s engagement. The release was a catalyst for the sustained growth of Uniswap since the episode, while SushiSwap has shown remarkable signs of platform growth in its own right.


Features of the Bitcoin System: 
The most well known cryptocurrency is Bitcoin. Bitcoin was launched in 2009, a year after a report that described the Bitcoin system was released under the name Satoshi Nakamoto. The system was designed to electronically mimic features of a cash transaction. It was designed to allow peer-to-peer (or person-to-person) transactions, without the need to know or trust the other person in the transaction, and to occur without the need for a central party (such as a bank). Unlike conventional national currencies such as Australian dollars, which get part of their value from being legislated as legal tender, Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies do not have any legislated or intrinsic value. Instead, the value of Bitcoin is determined by what people are willing to pay for it in the market (and, in theory, its value could fall to zero at any time).
One feature of the Bitcoin system is that the supply of Bitcoins increases at a pre-determined rate and is capped at around 21 million (with each bitcoin able to be subdivided into 100 million satoshis or 0.00000001 bitcoins). Because of this, the supply of Bitcoins has been commonly compared to the supply of a scarce commodity, such as gold.
The Bitcoin system allows transactions to occur directly from person to person without requiring a central party (such as a bank) to verify or record the transactions. This is unlike most conventional payment methods, such as electronic bank transfers, which rely on a central party to keep and update records of transactions. For example, commercial banks maintain a record of their customers' account balances, deposits and withdrawals.
Instead, the Bitcoin system uses ‘blockchain’ technology to record transactions and the ownership of bitcoins. This is essentially technology that connects groups of transactions (‘blocks’) together over time (in a ‘chain’). Each time a transaction occurs, it forms part of a new block that is added to the chain. As a result, the blockchain provides a record (or database) of every bitcoin transaction that has ever occurred, and it is available for anyone to access and update on a public network (this is often referred to as a ‘distributed ledger’). The integrity of the Bitcoin system is protected by ‘cryptography’, which is a method of verifying and securing data using complex mathematical algorithms (or codes). This makes the system very difficult to corrupt.
Bitcoin transactions are verified by other users of the network, and the process of compiling, verifying and confirming transactions is often referred to as ‘mining’. In particular, complex codes need to be solved to confirm transactions and make sure the system is not corrupted. The Bitcoin system increases the complexity of these codes as more computing power is used to solve them. A new block of transactions is compiled approximately every ten minutes. ‘Miners’ want to solve the codes and process transactions because they are rewarded with new bitcoins (currently 6.25 new Bitcoins per block).
The increase in competition between miners for new Bitcoins has seen large increases in the amount of computing power and electricity required (which is often used for air conditioning to cool computer systems). While it is difficult to calculate with precision, some estimates suggest that the annual energy consumption of the Bitcoin system is roughly equal to the country of Thailand.
This explainer is provided to facilitate the conceptual understanding of cryptocurrencies. It does not constitute advice, or a recommendation, to buy, trade or invest in Bitcoin or any other cryptocurrency. If you decide to trade or use cryptocurrencies you may be taking on risk for which there is no recourse.